 Okay, yes. Thank you, Rupert. My name is Sapna. I've got two questions. The first one is that when I've been to long silent retreats and when I've come back, I've felt a few days as if I was stoned. The mind was in, when I go to long silent retreats, the mind, when I come back, the mind's in a different state. And also I felt that with plant medicine as well, the experience. So my question is basically, can you overdo it? Can you overdo the practice which is, before you're matured enough, like is there a, how do I know that if I'm at the right pace or am I trying to rush through it or bypass it? If your practice involves giving your attention to some objective aspect of your experience, be that mantra meditation, plant medicine, yoga, whatever your practice, then yes, you can overdo it. However, if your practice involves abiding in being as being in the midst of experience, then you can't overdo it. So what we did this morning? You can't overdo that. I don't mean to imply that you can always sit quietly still on your chair with your eyes shut resting in being. You can overdo that. But if by resting in being you understand resting in being or more accurately resting as being in the midst of experience, not just in formal meditation sessions, then yes, it's what they refer to in the orthodox tradition when they, refer to praying without ceasing. You know, when I first heard that, when I was reading the Philokalia inspired by that tradition, I thought, wow, praying without ceasing. That means you're always repeating a prayer in your mind without ceasing. But how would you have time to think about anything else or to do anything else? I couldn't imagine that it would be possible to realistically pray without ceasing. And then much later on, I realized it doesn't mean repeating certain words without ceasing or giving your mind to some objective element of your experience. It means remaining as being, as infinite being, as God's being, all the time in the midst of whatever experience you're doing. And that's what we were doing this morning, just abiding in being as being. And you can do that formally like we do sometimes in meditation, but you can do it walking down the street, having dinner with your friends, cooking, doing your work. And my second question was that, this is where I'm a little confused. So when we talk about expansion, usually I've been told in the past is that stay with the awareness in the body, do not get out of the body. But when we're practicing awareness here, I could see the expansion. And the reason somebody said to me was that when you expand, if you're not stabilized enough and you're expanding your mind or you're expanding awareness beyond, there are different energies that you could catch. There are different kind of frequencies and energies. And so it's always better to stay. So that's my second question, is that valid? Is it true that you could become trans? I don't know if that makes sense. If you are mentally unstable or fragile or challenged, then what we do here may rather than take you to your true nature. For instance, the exercise I did with you earlier about being in this space, if you weren't quite grounded in yourself, but you were fragile emotionally, mentally, an experience like that could further destabilize you rather than take you to your true nature. So in that case, I wouldn't recommend it. But that's why it is sometimes said that you have to be a really good, healthy, regular ego to embark on this exploration. If you don't have a well-established sense of yourself as a separate self, but you haven't even integrated as a separate self yet, then if you embarked on this exploration, it could just further destabilize you. But like as somebody said, the ego death, or when we gave that Moth example, sometimes when you start losing, not you, sorry, I'm talking about myself, one can start losing the sense of the me, the I, and everything becomes quite fluid. And in that moment, sometimes emotions do arise and sometimes they subside like waves and sometimes they overwhelm. So would that still be a stable enough emotional state to practice? From what you've said, that would be fine. Yes, sometimes this exploration can provoke intense emotions like the fear of death. It's important that the confrontation with that emotion doesn't precipitate a psychotic break in you, but it takes you to your true nature. So you have to be quite strong and stable to be able to investigate your identity, because for most of us our identity is so firmly fixed in the body and the mind, that to challenge that identity, to shake it, to undermine it, it requires some courage and a certain strength. Yes, because what's happened with me is sometimes when, as I've gone into deeper self-investigation, everything has turned out to be just a story I've told myself. Yes, so you have to be able to face the fact sooner or later that everything you thought you knew about yourself is not true. You have to have a certain strength to be able to face that fact and not avoid it, because it's a profound challenge. What we explore here is a very profound challenge, not only to our own individual identity, but to our understanding of the nature of the world and others. It requires courage. It's not really courage. It requires a deep love of truth. The love of truth has to be so deep that you want to keep exploring it, irrespective of the consequences for your personal life, rather than maintaining the status quo of your identity in your world. You're so interested in what is true, in what is real, that you'll do it, you'll embark on that exploration, whatever it means for you personally. Your love of truth is stronger than your love of your fixed personal identity and your view of the world. Yes, and in my experience it could be as I got to know the truth better, I felt lighter, but then I came to a stage where I had a slight identity crisis, like who am I? And then that took a place, so it led me to a stage where I couldn't fake it to the extent that I was used to faking, that the mask I couldn't put it on, so I had that resulted in really changing jobs, taking on a different world. Yes, for some people this varies. Some people's lives can expand to accommodate this understanding. And those people don't experience a radical change in their relationship. It's usually relationships and work. Some people's relationships, particularly if both parties are interested in this, the relationship can expand. Originally it may have been a relationship between two egos with all the conflict that that entails, especially if two, but not always two, sometimes just with one, but ideally if both parties are interested, the relationship will grow as our understanding grows and the relationship will transform. The relationship will accommodate this understanding. Other relationships, they can't grow because they rely on all the tension that exists between two egos to function. That's what the relationship is based on. And if one, or it's usually just one, if one party in the relationship then starts being interested in this, that's going to shake up the relationship and there are two possibilities. Either the relationship will expand to accommodate it or it will crack and fall apart. And the same is true of our work. Some of us do work that we may have embarked on through an ordinary, just through the ordinary egoic motivation. And we start being interested in this understanding and the work we do can expand, can adapt, can evolve to accommodate this understanding. But other work can't. It's just not the right form, it's not the right framework. We feel that we can't express this understanding in that particular line of work, in which case we change jobs. Both are possible. So my question is how do I learn to balance because what happened, there was a slight rupture with my parents, the dynamics changed of what I was and what I wouldn't. So how do I balance that? Well, some relationships, as I said, some relationships expand to accommodate this understanding. Other crack and fall apart and you go your separate ways. There are some relationships that crack and fall apart, but you can't go your separate ways. You're bound by family ties. So what very often happens then is that there's a crack, there's a change, and there can be a period of time where there's tension, difficulty. Normally you would walk away from each other, but you can't because they're your siblings or your parents or your children. In which case, hopefully in time the relationship heals and you find a way of being truthful to yourself, not compromising your understanding, but also being open and loving with your family. But it can take time. Last question. During that time, when the emotions are quite, the rupture is quite fresh, that's when I feel emotionally unstable because I feel like, am I the cause of the hurt or the disturbance in the family? So to have a stable mind, how do I get to a stage where I can restabilize myself to continue? Then you have to take a step back from the situation that is inflammatory, your family and this. You have to go back to the stability of your true nature because your true nature is always stable. You have to go back there, re-establish yourself in your being when you're feeling unstable. It's because you've established yourself in your thoughts and feelings. You're immersed in your thoughts and feelings and thoughts and feelings are always unstable. Take a step back, establish yourself again in your being and then you go back to your family. But you try and stay there. Just one last thing to say about that. In relationships where only one party is interested in these matters and the other isn't and there's conflict or tension as a result, it is the one who has the greater understanding, that's all of you, who bears the responsibility for the relationship. We bear the greater responsibility. Thank you. Ah, yes. And then you had the question as well. Thank you. I think it would be nice to, if it is possible, to define awareness and you are awareness if there is a difference or I and self. So then before interval the question asks stillness and movement. After interval the question asks awareness and sensation and you very well explained about the sensation and it is also awareness. So four things. What is awareness? Is there any difference between you are awareness, I and self? Okay. Thank you. So define awareness. It's not possible to define awareness. Strictly speaking it's not possible to define awareness. Means what do you mean when you speak? When I speak of awareness. And also you are awareness? Let me stick with the first one. I'm just saying, I just wanted to preface what I say with it. Strictly speaking it's not possible to define awareness because all our language has evolved to define the things that we are aware of. The content of awareness, thoughts, feelings, sensations, perceptions and none of those words accurately define awareness because they all define finite qualities. So when we try to define awareness, this is just my disclaimer really. When we define awareness what we are really trying to do is to evoke the experience of awareness rather than describe it or define it. So awareness would be that which knows your experience. When you have a thought, that thought is known. When a thought floats by in your mind, that thought is known. You are aware of it, you know it. Would you agree? I'm listening. But I want to engage you in an experiential exploration. By definition, if you are having a thought, you must know that thought. Actually, I personally feel, due to awareness, you are aware that there is a thought. It's the same thing, you know your thought or you are aware of your thought. I use the word knowing and awareness synonymously. If you are having a thought, you are by definition knowing it or aware of it. There is a difference. I'm just trying to answer your question, what is awareness? That's all I'm trying to do. I'm trying to point to what awareness is. Let's take the sound of my voice. If you are hearing my voice and you obviously are, you must be knowing or aware of the sound. If you are seeing the sight of this room, you must be knowing or aware of the sight. If you are feeling the hand on the mic, you must be aware of that feeling. So that which knows the thought, the sound, the sight, the sensation, that which knows all of these experiences or illuminates them, is aware of them. That is awareness. When we look at a landscape, we see the landscape because the sunlight illuminates it. The sunlight illuminates the landscape. Well awareness illuminates experience. The sun illuminates the landscape with a physical light. Awareness illuminates experience with a knowing light, the light of pure knowing. That's awareness. I use the words awareness, consciousness, and knowing synonymously. Is that the same as I? Yes, strictly speaking, I, which is our essential, the word I refers to our essential self or our identity, is consciousness or awareness. But most people have allowed their awareness to become entangled with the content of experience. And so most people's sense of their self is a mixture of consciousness plus thoughts, feelings, sensations and perceptions. And this amalgam of consciousness plus the content of experience makes for an apparently finite consciousness. It's like the space of the universe plus the four walls of this room makes for an apparently finite space. The space of this room. The space of this room is not really finite. It borrows that the space of this room is the space of the universe, but it borrows its apparent limitations from the four walls of this room. We consciousness are the only infinite consciousness, the only content consciousness there is, but mixed with the four walls of experience, thinking, feeling, sensing and perceiving, our consciousness seems to become a finite consciousness just like the space in this room seems to have become a finite space. And that is why in the earlier stages of this investigation there is a separating process, a process of discrimination, where we distinguish the space in this room from the four walls of this room, where we distinguish the presence of awareness from the content of experience. That's why this discriminating, separating, the first step of what we do here is to discriminate between what we are aware of, thoughts, feelings, sensations and perceptions, and that which is aware. But ultimately that which is aware is what we call I, yes. What was the last question? Last question. Actually this is from where this, from this awareness, from where this I arise, or where is the point or line from where this I arise? I is the name that that which knows itself gives to itself. We all call ourselves I, but we don't call each other I. We call each other Tim and Mary and John and Jane and Peter and so on, but we call our self I. Everybody calls their self I. I don't refer to myself as Rupert, you call me Rupert, but I call myself I. Peter doesn't refer to himself as Peter, he refers to himself as I. We call him Peter, but he calls himself I. Mary doesn't call herself Mary, she calls herself I. We call her Mary. So I is the name that that which knows itself gives to itself. If your dog could refer to itself, it would call itself I. We call our dogs and cats Kitty and Bonnie and Brownie and, but if they could speak, they would all refer to themselves as I. I is the name that that which knows itself gives to itself. Now, what is it that knows itself? What is it that has the capacity to know itself? Can a body know itself? Can a thought know itself? Can a sensation know itself? Can a perception know itself? No, because none of these are none of these have the quality of knowing they are all known. So that which knows itself, it the one quality it must have must be knowing. It must have the capacity to know. So what is it that knows itself only knowing or consciousness, but only consciousness is conscious only awareness is aware. And therefore only awareness can know itself or indeed anything else. Therefore, strictly speaking, the name I always refers to consciousness is knowledge of itself. That's why I or I am is correctly understood is the divine name. If God, whatever we conceive God to be, we refer to God as God, but if God were to refer to itself, what would it say? What name would God give to itself? It would give the name I to itself. That's why I is the divine name. But most of us, as I said earlier, have allowed our self consciousness to become mixed up with the content of experience, thoughts, feelings, sensations and perceptions. And therefore for most of us, I refers not to pure consciousness, but to this conglomeration of mind and body. But that's a mistake. That's a mistaken identity. Am I responding to your questions? Yes, I am listening carefully. So is it required to name... So we can hear you a bit. Is it required to name that knowing I? No, no. It creates then... For practical purposes, it's... Like a confusion and then it's become a separate self. Not necessarily, not if it's... But it would be very difficult in practical purposes, never to refer to... Never to use the word I. And it would be a little tedious if we went around saying, One feels hungry today. One feels a little tired today. So of course when we say I feel tired, I then refers to the body. But I don't think it's necessary to be too puritanical and to say that the body feels hungry or the body feels tired today. If somebody asks me how I am, I just say I feel tired. Using language is okay, but... So yeah, we should be a little not too strict with our language. And unless we're talking very specifically like we are here, where it's necessary to define our terms more carefully. You see, if we wanted to speak the truth all the time, we should remain silent. Yes. I usually leave it to the last 20 minutes before I say this. Nothing we say is true. It's not possible. If we wanted to express the truth, the very best we can do is to say I am. That's the highest expression of truth. Even that is not necessary, but anything apart from that is a concession, is not true. And some people recognize this and prefer not to speak about these matters. And I respect that. They just use language for ordinary, ordinary everyday matters. Because they understand we can't speak of the truth and therefore I'm not going to even try. Remember the Zen Master, if I speak I tell a lie. I was trying to say that actually if you, like there is a awareness. And when we say I am the awareness, we are immediately creating I. It's true. But like you said, son, again it's a legitimate concession to make to someone for instance who feels that what they essentially are is this mixture of a body and a mind. It is legitimate to say to them, no, you are awareness. You are essentially awareness. Now this suggests that there is awareness plus you. That's not true. There's just awareness. However, as a concession to the one who believes that they are a mind and a body, it is legitimate and in most cases necessary to say, no, see that you're not essentially a mixture of thoughts, feelings, sensations and perceptions. You are that which is aware of them. Even the great Mahavakyas in the Vedantic tradition, the four great Mahavakyas that many of you know, how are that? You are that. These are concessions. What you is being referred to. Really it should say you are that without being you and you are that without being that because the you and the that suggest a subject and an object. And they're not quite true that they are the greatest sayings in the Vedantic tradition, but they're not quite true. Nothing that is said in the Vedantic tradition is ultimately true, but it's all legitimate in reference to our beliefs and feelings. So the very, very highest Mahavakya higher than all the other Mahavakyas is I am. Then one step down from there, I am that. You are that. Only that is real. These are just one step off the top of the mountain, but they're legitimate things to say if we agree that it is legitimate to speak about these things. But you could, I said earlier, awareness does not know that it is awareness. It is we the finite mind that refers to awareness as awareness. God does not know that it is God. It is we the finite mind that speaks of God. So we shouldn't even speak of awareness or God, but then we fall silent. Thank you for your kindness. Okay, thank you. Did you still have a question? Yes, yes, yes, you had your hand up for a while. You were very patient. My name is John. I have a question which I'm a little shy to ask, but it's about your experience and how, how does the experience of teaching enrich your practice? How does, how has my or does my experience of teaching enrich my practice? That's a very interesting question, John. If you had asked me 15 years ago when I started writing and speaking about these matters, how do you think the experience of writing and speaking about these matters will will change and enrich your practice? I could not then have begun to imagine how the extent to which it would deepen and enrich my experience, I had no idea. I just thought that, you know, I would start speaking and writing and I would just share my understanding such as it is, but I had no idea that the evolution that I would have to go through in my attempt. To explain my understanding such as it is to, to others. Because very often if I was asked a question that was identical or very similar to a question that I had asked, that was relatively easy. I had, I had taken the pathway. I had found the answer to that question myself. So I knew how to answer that question. I had been there. But the vast majority of questions I was asked and am asked are not questions that I asked myself. They're different because we're all, we're all lost in the forest in a slightly different part of the forest. So I had to, I had to tailor my understanding such as it is to the question. I had to find a new pathway. And in order to find that new pathway, I had to, I had to go in myself to find the answer. So I thought I had learned, and I had indeed learned an enormous amount from my teachers before I started speaking and writing about these matters. But that was nothing compared to what I've learned since and what I continue to learn. Because in the process of trying to make the understanding more understandable, more experiential, more direct, I've had to, I've had to find those pathways in myself. I've had to find the experience of myself and then try and articulate it. So it's been a, it's been a continual process of further self exploration and refinement in the way I speak. And that's why I sometimes say that the teaching, it doesn't really just come from me. It comes from our interaction. It comes from, well, we've witnessed it today. I've said things today that I've never said before. It comes out of the interaction of our minds. It's that that creates the teaching and that's what keeps the teaching fresh. But when I'm trying to respond to an answer, I'm not reaching back into my memory, something I've heard or read, and just regurgitating it. I'm trying to find a living answer in response to the question. And that's what creates, hopefully, a living teaching that is both the traditional teaching, the tradition with a T. It's the perennial understanding, but it's hopefully tailored to our time and our particular difficulty or question. So there's a co-creation there. It's a kind of co-creation. Yes, exactly. It arises out of the conjunction of, of, of, of, it arises out of our conversation. Yes, that's what creates the teaching and that's what, in my opinion, that's what keeps the teaching fresh. It's why it's not canned or frozen. It doesn't come from the past. It arises fresh out of this circumstance. Thank you. Thank you. Hi, Rupert. Good to see you. Nice to see you again. My question's about devotion. For many years I've been outward looking into devotion to a deity or a enlightened master. And just recently it feels like that sense of devotion has done a U-turn and is just on inward. And there's a deepening sense of reverence. I go in, there's a sense that my head's bowed in prayer. And there's a sense of not really wanting to, even actually asking a question, it's like, I don't know, it's so inward now. My circumstances have changed. My mum's gone into a care home and now I have just, this has just happened out of the blue, that it's just deepening into reverence and not wanting to really be around people, just wanting to be left alone, just wanting to be just with this sense of reverence. Could you just maybe expand on that? Well, I don't mean... Yes, it's a beautiful evolution of devotion. God once stood at an infinite distance from you and you as a separate self were devoted to God. Now your devotion, as you say, turned around. You feel God's being as your very own being. And all that remains now is for any residual sense of being a devotee in relation to that infinite being. Because in infinite being there's no room for God's infinite being and God's devotee. And that's, I'm not implying that this is the case for you, but that's the last, that's the most difficult thing for one on the path of devotion to give up. Because many of us on the path of devotion, our identities are invested in being the perfect devotee. There are no perfect devotees. The perfect devotee is one for whom there is only God's infinite being. There is no person left either to be devoted or not to be devoted. But that's happening anyway in you. So the only being that remains in you is God's being that the space in this room, feeling that the only space present in this room is the space of the universe. There is no remnant of a finite space left. There never was to begin with actually. But now all that remains is the one infinite space of the universe, such as you all that was there to begin with. So that the devotee has come full circle. And if that for you, now that your mother is in a care home and you have more space in your life, and if it requires for you staying home, not having that much social interaction, just abiding in this presence as this presence, then that's the highest form of devotion for you. Yes, I would encourage you. Thank you. Okay, one more question. Sorry, I'm just choosing at random. Hello there, I'm Matthew. Hello Matthew. I've heard you say a few times that enlightenment is not an experience. Yes. It's one of your things. And I would just curious about that because as you know, there's a long history in mystical traditions of people who had what they call experiences like the white light of the Godhead or whatever. And so that would, you know, hence enlightenment where there's a distinct physiological change. It seems, you know, brain chemistry and breathing and so on. So we're just wondering on your thoughts about enlightenment. Yes, not being an experience. Okay. The physiological changes, the changes that may take place in the body and or mind, are the changes that may take place as a result of or as a consequence of the recognition of our true nature. But they are not themselves the recognition of our true nature. They are the side effect of it in the mind and the body. What do I mean when I say enlightenment is not an experience. It's not an experience of the mind or in the mind or the body. It's not a thought feeling, sensation or perception. The way we tend naively and I certainly conceived enlightenment like this in the early days. If I imagine the best experience I could ever have and then I imagine that times a hundred. I thought enlightenment must be like that. It's a complete misconception. Enlightenment is one of the ways we could define enlightenment would be the recognition of the nature of being. It's got nothing to do with the content of your thoughts, feelings, sensations or perceptions. Just the recognition of the nature of being. Nothing extraordinary, nothing mystical, nothing mysterious, nothing very spiritual, nothing exotic, nothing to write home about, nothing really to talk about. Everybody knows that they exist. Is there anyone here that is not now having the feeling of being? Just a simple ordinary feeling of being. Everyone is having the experience of being. Even if we were to ask this question to people that are not interested in these matters. If we were to just go out on the street and stop people on the street randomly and say, do you have the experience of being? As long as they understood the question they would pause and go, of course I'm having the experience of being. Everyone has the experience. If your dog could understand our language and you said to your dog, are you having the experience of being? Your dog would pause and go, yeah, of course. Of course I am. Or your cat or your goldfish. So everyone has the experience of being. The experience of being is overlooked most of the time because we're so focused on the content of experience. But even though it's overlooked, we still all have the experience of being all the time. What the vast majority of people do is allow their being to be mixed up with and therefore seemingly qualified by the content of experience. So they don't experience their being. Everyone experiences their being, but not everyone experiences their being as it essentially is. Because their experience of their being is coloured, is mixed with thoughts and feelings and seems as a result to have acquired their qualities. So that's why there is this discriminating process, this separating out what is the experience of pure being all alone. What's the nature of the screen before the movie begins? What's the nature of the space in this room before there are any people or objects within it? So the first step is just the recognition of being, which everybody has, although most people overlook it most of the time. But then that's not yet enlightenment. That's not yet what is traditionally referred to as enlightenment, just the recognition that I am. What's traditionally referred to enlightenment is the recognition of the nature of the being that I am. And that for most people requires some exploration. You have to separate it out from all the qualities that it's acquired from the content of experience. So enlightenment is just the simple recognition of the nature of being. It might have a profound effect on the mind and body and there may be unusual signs, cities and unusual signs that arise in the mind and the body as a result of the knot of tension, the knot of separation releases with this recognition. There may be unusual signs in the mind and the body, but there may not be any unusual signs. It could happen just very quietly. And then slowly the mind and the body would acclimatize to this new recognition of ourself and there would be changes in time. But not necessarily exotic or extraordinary. You just find that your sorrow and your anxiety leave you and you find yourself in peace. And you may never, if somebody asks you, you never have the sense of being enlightened. You don't think that you're either enlightened or unenlightened. You don't necessarily refer to any experience. Some people say, oh, I had this great awakening experience at 3 p.m. on the 3rd of July. It's like when a headache leaves you. You very rarely notice when a headache leaves you. You just notice later that evening, oh, goodness. My headache left me sometime during the day. I didn't know why. I don't know why. And it just, I'm at peace now. So it's in that context that I suggest awakening is, it's not only is it not an exotic extraordinary mysterious experience. It's not really an experience in a strict sense of the word at all. It's just a simple recognition of the nature of being. I suppose just a last follow up. If we arrive at the same experience of the world through an actual process that you describe, my only point was that what you're saying is that if somebody claims, or historically, there are people who have been enlightened through an experience like the white light, seeing white light, and all these physiological changes, perhaps their view of the world and experience of the world after that is the same as through that, if you like, the gradual recognition of things. But wouldn't they have also been said to have had an enlightenment experience? I am sticking to my guns. There are no enlightenment experiences. There are exotic experiences like seeing bright lights that may or may not accompany the recognition of our true nature. The recognition of our true nature is not an experience that happens in time or space. It's not an experience. I don't know how to say it more simply. Okay, it's five o'clock. I'm sorry. There are lots of you still with your hands up. I'm sorry that we haven't got round to all of your questions. Lovely, as always, to be with you all. Thank you all. God bless. Thank you. Thank you.